April the fourth, 1968 at 6:00 PM.
The minister stood on the balcony of the Lorraine motel in Memphis.
He was only 39 yet. He had accumulated many decades worth of struggles,
triumphs and setbacks.
The civil rights leader had spurred landmark victories against segregation and
racial discrimination in the United States.
There was so much more for him to accomplish, but at 6:01 PM,
a snapping sound cracked loud in the Memphis sky.
A bullet flew across the road and Martin Luther king Jr. Fell to the ground,
bleeding from his head and neck
Almost four decades before the rifle was fired. Martin Luther king Jr.
Was born on January the 15th, 1929 in Atlanta, Georgia.
The seconds of three siblings,
he looked on in admiration at his minister father,
as he fought racial segregation,
still rifle and Southern states king senior was a member of the national
association for the advancement of, of people or N NA AAC,
P and did won a campaign on equal pay for white and black teachers in America.
By his late teens,
Martin had decided that social action was his true calling and the religion
would be the means to that end.
His decision had been influenced by his father, but also by the essay,
civil disobedience by Henry David Thoreau.
Its basic principle is that a citizens first of obligation is to do what they
believe is right and not to follow the laws dictated by a majority or an unjust
government.
So in September of 1948, Martin enrolled at Crowser seminary,
he excelled there becoming the first African American student body president.
He read voraciously on theology and philosophy of nowhere.
His studies on Walter Chen,
Bush and his notion of a church responsible for social justice,
but especially on Karl marks,
king appreciated marks' critique of unbridled capitalism,
but he never embraced communism due to its atheistic views. In 1951 king Jr.
Graduated from Crozier and continued his education at Boston university while
pursuing a PhD. He conducted with equal determination,
the courtship of a young students at the new England conservatory, miss Carta,
Scott,
he won over her initial reluctance about dating a minister and the two were
married on the 18th of June, 1953.
Dr.
King was soon offered a post as minister at the Dexter avenue Baptist church in
Montgomery, Alabama on December the first 1955, uh,
black seamstres refused to give up her seat to a white passenger on one of
Montgomery's segregated buses. Her name was Rosa parks.
Since we've actually done a biographics video all about her before.
So check it out after this one, if you fancy it,
the white bus driver had Mrs. Parks arrested prompting the reaction of the NAACP
and the women's, his political council.
They organized a boycot of Montgomery bus services supported by nearly 20,000
African American citizens king initially offered nothing more than the basement
of his church as a meeting place for the activists,
but eventually he was offered the chance to lead their group a chance,
which he accepted king and ARD fan of Martin. Ganzi stressed.
The importance of nonviolent protest.
The minister led the boycot for most of 1956 becoming the target of threats and
violence by white citizens and the police.
The protest ended on December the 21st,
1956 when the Supreme court ruled that segregation on buses was
unconstitutional.
But attacks from the white community did not stop homes and churches were bombed
or shot at Dr. King had scored an initial success,
but a hard struggle still lay ahead.
In January of 1957 king and other leaders of the boycot gathered in Atlanta,
Georgia,
and found that the Southern Christie and leadership conference or CLC with the
aim of coordinating civil rights protests,
king became president and fundraiser of the conference traveling across the
nation and attracting crowds with his charisma and natural Ary skills in one of
his first recorded speeches,
king outlined his concept of love as a force for change to fight an unjust
system saying love is not merely an emotional something love is the refusal to
defeat any individual. You seek only to defeat evil systems,
individuals who happen to be caught up in that system.
You love that you seek to defeat the system.
King was encouraged and supported by a trio of advisors with hard left
inclinations. They are thrusted in an activist with communist sympathies.
So socialist Ella baker and Stanley Levison,
a former leading member of the us communist party in February,
1957 king and his advisor sent a message to president Eisenhower requesting that
he shared a conference on civil rights. I ignored the letter,
but time magazine didn't and they featured Dr. King on its cover in may
king spoke to almost 40,000 people at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC.
Later in the year,
he launched the crusade for citizenship program to register 2 million black
voters in time for the 1960 presidential election.
His caucus was growing mightily in 1958.
The reverends published stride toward freedom.
His accounts of the Montgomery bus boycots the book sold well in.
He attended many books, signing events,
a one of them in Harlem in September the 20th, 1958, Dr.
King was stabbed by Iola Curry later diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.
The attacker used a letter opener,
which slid very close to the minister's heart.
One of his lungs as he later recalls. And he sneezed in that moment.
He would've surely died.
Luckily surgeons at Harlem hospital were able to remove the blade without
causing further damage.
While con thinking took the occasion to travel to India in February 9 59,
where he deepened his knowledge of nonviolent protest at the Gandhi peace
foundation upon returning king had occasion to test these tactics
In April of 1959,
African American college students in North Carolina in a staged peaceful sit-ins
in di to protest segregation.
The S SCLC had become involved with Ella baker who organized the student
nonviolent coordinating committee or SNCC in rally, North Carolina.
When the protest spread to Georgia king participated in a sit-in in an Atlanta
department store and was briefly jailed.
Luckily he was released early from prison, thanks to presidential candidate,
John F. Kennedy Kennedy sympathized with the civil rights movement,
but was also trying to appeal to white, moderate southerners,
misled the SMCC to distrust king.
If he could appeal to Kennedy and his white moderates,
how could he be the best representative for them?
King's devotions of the civil rights causes would be questioned again in the
summer of 1961, the organization called core,
the Congress of racial equality had organized a series of freedom rides or
interstate bus trips intended to desegregate stations.
King helped core by training freedom riders in the methods of nonviolent
protests. But when they were met with violence, by why counter protestors,
the minister questioned whether the campaign was worth all this pain King's
reticence attracted more suspicion and criticism King's involvements. However,
was supremely beneficial to the cause through his dialogue with attorney
general, Robert Kennedy, the brought the federal government to his site.
Robert Kennedy ensured federal agencies intervened to protect core protestors
and ordered a on segregation in interstate travel in December,
1961 king joined another existing action. The Albany movement in Georgia,
this was another campaign of sit-ins led by the SNCC.
Often many of its members had been incarcerated king decided to step in Ian's
activists. Ralph Anahi were also jailed,
but they kept campaigning until July, 1962. Meanwhile,
young pro protesters creep hard and frustrated until violence broke out a crowd
of 2000 confronted the police despite king,
trying to maintain peace with a prayer vigil.
City authorities eventually obtained a federal injunction,
which banned king and the SNCC from staging any type of protest until then king
at Fort local authorities with the help of the federal government.
Now that the federal government was being used against him or his chances,
even Bobby Kennedy advised him not to try his luck against the injunction.
Martin Luther king left Albany in August. It had been in defeat,
but he would learn from his mistakes for his next campaign in Birmingham,
Alabama
in Birmingham, the state governor,
the city mayor and for police were all known segregationist between 1957 and
19 62 17 bombings had taken place against the black households and churches.
One of them was the church belonging to SCLC member,
Reverend Shuttleworth who invited king to take action in Birmingham.
His campaign started on April the third 90 63 with lunch counter sit-ins that
were followed by March on city hall. Again,
not on violent protests were followed by mass arrests and an injunction against
the SCLC campaigns. But now the injunction came from a state court,
not a federal one,
and king have no qualms in violating state law king and Ralph Ana bled
another rally on April the 12th. The police cracked down,
which eventually led to the two leaders being placed in solitary confinement.
While in prison king wrote his famous us letter from a Birmingham jail,
which became something of a manifesto for his movement in its equal for
Christians to become a force for change.
Even at the price of being treated as agitators or disturbers of the peace,
the church was not supposed to fit into the society around it,
but to transform it by standing against injustice. In the meantime, Dr.
King's wife, Carretta had contacted the white house.
Bobby Kennedy stepped in sending FBI agents to Birmingham to ensure better
treatment for the minister.
He was soon released from jail and more marches followed,
met by increasingly violent actions by the police chief,
who resorted to far hoses and attacked dogs.
The televised images of the BI and rights struck a chord with the conscience of
the nation. It was a turning point for the civil rights movement,
which prompted thousands of citizens to express their outrage to the white
house. It became evident that the Kennedys,
that it was time to tackle racial issues more seriously with the tide of the
nation, turning against them.
Birmingham city hall signaled its willingness to negotiate a desegregation
program. It was a great victory.
The Dr. King albeit a bitter one and a common pattern concessions to African
Americans were followed by violence from white citizens who were messed with
retaliation from the black community, true to his principles.
King patrolled the streets of burning and preaching African Americans to answer
violence only with peace.
A natural follow up to Birmingham was the organization of a nationwide event.
The March on Washington for jobs and freedom would take place in August the
28th, 1963 tens of thousands of people would March the Lincoln Memorial,
where they would listen to speeches by Dr. King and other Raiders.
The planning of the event proved controversial from the start, the Ken,
the administration supportive of king strife that agreed to submit a civil
rights bill before Congress, a landmark moment.
And yet both JFK and Bobby feared that if the March degenerated into writing
Congress could reject the bill.
So the administration participated in the planning,
editing speeches and including white organizations in the roster of
participants. This move in leaders,
such as Malcolm X from the nation of Islam who questions,
the authenticity of the March,
the March organizes themselves were worried that the S SCLC had appointed bay
Rustin as chief planner. In fact,
the FBI held a big dossier on him as a known communist to draft Dodger and
homosexual.
But despite internal concerns that March for jobs and freedom was a success
attendance exceeded expectations and a crowd of 250,000.
Listen to Martin Luther king Jr's most famous speech.
I have a dream.
My poor little children
will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of
their skin, but by the content of their a character.
I have a dream that one day, every valley shall be ex exhausted.
Every hill in mounting shall be made.
All the rough places will be made plain and the crook places will be made.
Straight. And he warns about not turning that dream into a nightmare of hatred.
We must forever conduct our struggle on that high plain of dignity and
discipline.
We must not allow our creative protests to degenerate
into physical violence again, and a gain.
We must rise to the majestic Heights of meeting physical force
with soul.
Force king, and the S CRC had gone from strength to strength,
but their victories would be soured by the opposition of one of the most
powerful men in America, FBI director, Jay Edgar, Hoover,
The director of the FBI had long feared that the civil rights movement may be
infiltrated by communism. The bureau had a dossier about Rustin,
but their chief Warry came from lawyers, Stanley Levison.
One of King's top advisors since the mid 1950s,
the FBI kept tabs on Levison bys network of informants,
including two members of the communist party named and Morris Charles,
the Charles reported that Levison had been a top financer for the party until
early 1957, before growing disillusioned with communism. Then in January, 1962,
JAG,
Charles learns that Levison had been writing speeches for Dr. King days later.
Bobby Kennedy received notice from Hoover Levison was a member of the communist
party USA and was allegedly a close advisor to Reverend Martin Luther king,
Jr. Robert Kennedy authorized the bugging of Leviton's office privately.
He wanted king to sever ties with him all the while.
Jay Edgar Hoover suspected that king was a communist too.
And indeed king had been sounded out by the Soviets.
According to disclosures by X KGB, archivist,
vastly mid Mosco had taken an interest in infiltrating the civil rights
movements,
but had found that king was too pro-American and anti communit to consider any
sort of relationship with the Soviets.
Subsequently the KGB launched a disinformation campaign in African newspapers
depicting king as a government porn,
regardless Hoover's suspicion grew into personal dislike until late 1962,
when king criticized the bureaus investigation of racial crimes in Albany,
according to a department of justice report,
this is when the flames of director Hoover's antipathy for Dr.
King were fans into open hostility.
We believe the persistent controversy between Dr. King and director Hoover was a
major factor in the Bureau's determination to discredit Dr.
King and destroy his leadership role.
This hostility may explain what happened in March of 1963,
Jack child's informed the FBI that Levison and severed all ties with the party,
but Hoover failed to notify the attorney general. So in June of 1963,
Bobby Kennedy increased his pressure on king.
The minister had to get rid of Levison king reluctantly agreed,
but he and Levison remained in touch using attorney Clarence B Jones as a
telephonic intermediary. The FBI picked up on the,
the reason and why tap Jones Simon office in August of 1963 king stayed at
Jones' place and Hoover's bugs recorded something unexpected proof of an extra
marital affair that king was involved in. Then in October of 1963,
Robert Kennedy extended permission to conduct technical surveillance on king.
The investigation was led by FBI assistant director, William C. Sullivan,
who focused on documenting the minister's private activities and sex life.
But Sullivan did not just record King's encounters on tape in 1975,
FBI supervisors, Seymour Fred Phillips testified before the us Senate,
that Sullivan had used one of these tapes to black. Now, Reverend king,
he had sent him a copy of a recording alongside an anonymous letter,
threatening to expose the truth to Carretta and the public,
the message included availed invitation for the minister to commit suicide less.
The information be leaked. King ignored. The threats,
obviously in the FBI did not go public with the scandal,
but the who the king feud continued throughout 1964 king accused Hoover of a
betting racist, right?
Wingers Hoover retorted by calling him the most notorious liar in the country
and a sexual degenerate FBI agents continued to monitor the civil rights leader,
but most surveillance was dropped in 1965.
This is when the Kings moved into a new house in Atlanta,
apparently for administrative reasons,
Hoover wanted to cut down on his astronomical number of wire.
So he did not authorize the bugging of King's new place.
The FBI tapes will be fully disclosed in 2027,
but some of the transcripts and surveillance notes were declassified in June of
2019.
The dossier reveals how king engaged in several extramarital affairs with fellow
activists, parishioners and sex workers, FBI agents, even suspected.
He may have fathered a child out of wedlock.
Page 18 of the report contains a disturbing comment on January the fifth,
1964 king and other SCLC officials checked into a hotel in Washington, DC.
The group met in the room of a Baltimore minister and started discussing which
of their parishioners would be suitable for natural and unnatural sex acts.
When one of the women in the group protested her disapproval,
the Baltimore minister immediately,
and forcibly raped her a handwritten note possibly by Sullivan comments that
king looked on laughed and offered advice. So could that be true?
David J Garrow,
the Pulitz surprise winning biographer of king was the first to review the
documents in a lengthy essay commoning that we will know the full truth.
Only when the actual tapes are revealed.
Let's return to King's public life.
As we have reached the pinnacle of his career in 1964,
king offered his support to Lydon Johnson's electoral campaign.
Following the assassination of JFK Johnson had vowed to support the civil rights
bill and on July,
the second Johnson invited king to the white house for a signing of the rights
act into law.
This was the crowning achievement of King's efforts in Montgomery and Birmingham
law,
which prohibited discrimination in public places provided for the integration of
schools and other facilities and made workplace discrimination illegal.
In October of that same year, the reverends received a phone call from Oslo,
won the Nobel peace prize. He collected the award on December the 10th,
donating the prize money to the civil rights movements shortly after his return.
Another trial awaited him in Selma, Alabama.
This is where the black population had been actively prevented from registering
to vote by a segregationist mayor and police chief on February,
the first king letter,
March to the Selma courthouse to protest slow voter registration. Inevitably,
it was jailed for five days. A second March took place on the 18th,
but protest were attacked by a white mob.
A young black man was shot and died of his wounds.
King knew that he had to involve the president at this stage.
So on March the fifth,
he met with Johnson and encouraged him to introduce the voting rights bill.
The aim was to outlaw stalling tactics and intimidation used to prevent African
Americans from vote registering, but Johnson declined.
So king unveiled his next plan,
a massive March from Selma to Montgomery on March the seventh,
more than 500 people began marching up the highway to Montgomery.
When they reached the Edmund Pettus bridge,
they were confronted by state police.
At least 66 protestors were badly injured in the RS,
but televised images of the battle inspired similar protests in major cities
nationwide Johnson was now paying full attention to this struggle.
King made his next move. Second and March of March again,
demonstrators met with police on the Edmund pats bridge,
but this time king ordered the March to disperse.
Despite the protests of fellow activists that night back in Selma,
a white minister from Boston had participated in the March,
was murdered by Klansman.
The Selma case exploded and thousands of religious leaders picketed the white
house.
President Johnson was now convinced that he needed to support Martin Luther
king. In this struggle on March the 24th,
he ordered 4,000 troops to escort a third and successful March.
Omey another big victory for king and the S SCLC soured again by another
killing. A white activist was shot later that night. Nonetheless,
the events of Selma prompted Johnson to draft the voting rights bill,
which was signed into law on August the sixth, 1965,
Just six days later,
king first spoke against at an SCLC convention king
demanded that the government ended its intervention in Vietnam and even offered
to lead peace negotiations with the north Vietnamese leader. HoChi men.
They are thrusted and discouraged him from tackling the issue.
As the civil rights movement could not afford to alienate Johnson's support.
Moreover,
they could not disperse their energies into further causes or movements for the
moments king agreed.
His next campaign of note would focus on improving economic conditions for black
communities in Northern cities.
He organized the freedom Sunday in Chicago on July the 10th,
1966 and 45,000 people joined the peaceful events,
but rods broke out in Chicago's west side between black youth and the national
guard.
All in all the experience did not yield the reforms that king had hoped for.
It appears that the more militant activists were rejecting his nonviolent
tactics. One of them,
the head of the SNCC Stokley Carmichael parted ways with king and
co-founded the black Panther party in November of 1966 king resumed his
criticism of the war. He testified to the Senate,
the military spending was taking precedence over the budget designs to improve
the living conditions of urban black communities. The.
Bombs in Vietnam exploded home.
They destroyed the dream and possibility for a decent America.
On February the 25th,
1967 king delivered his first public speech against the war followed by an
anti-war demonstration in March. Then in April of 1967,
his each beyond Vietnam made the news, but not in a positive way.
King expressed his sympathies for the Vietnam and called for us forces to leave
Vietnam life magazine objected that the speech sounded like Vietnam propaganda,
and the Reverend was attacked by other civil rights groups. More importantly,
the speech angered president Johnson and revived the FBI's efforts against king.
The bureau disseminated articles criticizing the reverends and even hindered the
SCL C fundraising efforts.
King realized that he could not play a decisive role in the PAs movement and
that the domestic issues revolving around racism and poverty had to remain his
primary focus late in 1967 king announced his plans for a poor people's March
on Washington on April the 22nd, 1968.
It was conceived as a huge rally of the poor with no racial limitations intended
to shut down the capital into a proper reforms were made,
but Martin Luther king Jr. Had never lived to see it
In March of 1968.
Reverends king joined a strike of black sanitation workers in Memphis,
Tennessee who demanded equal pay king joins a first March on the 28th,
which soon turned violent, not approving of these methods. King left Memphis,
but returned a few days later on April.
The third on that night king delivered his lost speech.
I've been to the mountain top.
Like anybody. I would like to live a long life,
but I'm not concerned about that. Now
I just wanna do God's will. And I've seen
the promise land. I may get there with you,
but I want you to know the night that we,
as a people will get to the promise land.
I may not get there. He said,
and unfortunately this line rang nearly prescient as the following afternoon,
the bullet of an assassin ended Martin Luther king Jr's life.
The shooter was a man named James Earl Ray following the shooting riots are
wrapped across the states,
but the death of king also had the effect of coalescing,
his supporters into peaceful and meaningful protest.
The Memphis strike and the poor people's March on Washington were a success
during his lifetime reverends king had his critics both within and outside the
civil rights movement.
The Millers in factions dismissed his nonviolent tactics and criticized his
appeal to moderate whites while law enforcement opposed him and sought to
discredit him. And in the not too distant future,
we'll find out the definitive truth about his private life and his misdeeds,
but no one can deny the long lasting effects of his major legacy.
The culmination of the civil rights and voting rights acts more than any other
leader of his time. King dead dream.
Even today's life's work may yet remain incomplete,
but for the betterment of all his dreams have taken a concrete shape.
So I really hope you found today's video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up on below. Don't forget a subscribe and as always,
thank you for watching.